Introduction
============

DcmStack allows series of DICOM images to be stacked into multi-dimensional 
volumes. These volumes can be written out as Nifti files with an optional 
header extension (the *DcmMeta* extension) containing all of the meta data 
from the source DICOM files.

Dependencies
------------

DcmStack has been developed and tested on Python 2.7. Python version 2.6
may be compatible.

DcmStack requires the packages pydicom_ (>=0.9.7) and NiBabel_.

.. _pydicom: http://code.google.com/p/pydicom/
.. _nibabel: http://nipy.sourceforge.net/nibabel/

Installation
------------

Download the latest release from github_, and run easy_install on the 
downloaded .zip file.

.. _github: https://github.com/moloney/dcmstack/tags


Basic Conversion 
----------------

DcmStack is a python package (*dcmstack*) with two command line interfaces 
(*dcmstack* and *nitool*).

It is recommended that you sort your DICOM data into directories (at least 
per study, but perferably by series) before conversion.

To convert directories of DICOM data from the command line you generally 
just need to pass the directories to *dcmstack*:

.. code-block:: console
    
    $ dcmstack -v 032-MPRAGEAXTI900Pre/
    Processing source directory 032-MPRAGEAXTI900Pre/
    Found 64 source files in the directory
    Created 1 stacks of DICOM images
    Writing out stack to path 032-MPRAGEAXTI900Pre/032-MPRAGE_AX_TI900_Pre.nii.gz
    
Here we use the verbose flab (*-v*) to show what is going on behind the 
scenes. To embed the DcmMeta header extension we need to use the *--embed* 
option. For more information see :doc:`CLI_Tutorial`.

Performing the conversion from Python requires a few extra steps:

.. code-block:: python
    
    >>> import dcmstack
    >>> from glob import glob
    >>> src_dcms = glob('032-MPRAGEAXTI900Pre/*.dcm')
    >>> stacks = dcmstack.parse_and_stack(src_dcms)
    >>> nii = stacks['032-MPRAGE AX TI900 Pre'].to_nifti()
    >>> nii.to_filename('output.nii.gz')

The *parse_and_stack* function has many optional arguments that closely 
match the command line options for *dcmstack*. To embed the DcmMeta 
extension pass *embed_meta=True* to the *to_nifti* method. For more 
information see :doc:`Python_Tutorial`.

Basic Meta Data Usage
---------------------

To work with Nifti files containing the embedded DcmMeta extension on the 
command line, use the *nitool* command. The *nitool* command has several sub 
commands.

.. code-block:: console

    $ nitool lookup InversionTime 032-MPRAGEAXTI900Pre/032-MPRAGE_AX_TI900_Pre.nii.gz 
    900.0

Here we use the *lookup* sub command to lookup up the value for 
'InversionTime'. For more information about using *nitool* see 
:doc:`CLI_Tutorial`.

To work with the extended Nifti files from Python, use the *NiftiWrapper* class.

.. code-block:: python

    >>> from dcmstack import dcmmeta
    >>> nii_wrp = dcmmeta.NiftiWrapper.from_filename('032-MPRAGEAXTI900Pre/032-MPRAGE_AX_TI900_Pre.nii.gz')
    >>> nii_wrp.get_meta('InversionTime')
    900.0
    
For more information on using the *NiftiWrapper* class see 
:doc:`Python_Tutorial`.

For information on the DcmMeta extension see :doc:`DcmMeta_Extension`.


